

Sarah whimpered. She felt the ground tremble as Humongous, ax raised,
detached himself from the doors and stamped toward them. Beside her,
she heard Ludo roar, but it was a mere piping sound in comparison to
the terrible noise made by this Goliath goblin. 

Ambrosius took one look and sensibly bolted. Sir Didymus, dumped on
the ground, furiously ordered his steed to return. Ambrosius was
having none of it. He lurked behind a buttress. 

"Pshaw!" Sir Didymus clicked his fingers in irritation. "Were yon
warrior and I to joust with lances, I would make short work of him." 

Humongous was not yon now. He had come close enough to aim a massive
ax blow at the trio. It missed them, but gashed a great wound in the
stone wall. A fountain of sparks spurted from the steel axhead. 

The three dodged past Humongous's feet, but he jerked rapidly around
and smashed his ax down again with both hands. Screaming, they leaped
apart, and the ax hammered the ground between them, burying itself
among shattered paving stones. The giant withdrew it effortlessly,
and now, crouching, he delivered a scything swing at them. The threw
themselves flat, and heard the ax whiz over them with a noise like an
ignited rocket. 

They saw the ax raised high again, and scuttled for cover to the wall
of the courtyard. The descending ax carved a slice off a buttress.
Blow followed blow. Each one would have left no more of them than
there is of a mosquito squashed on a wall. All that had saved them so
far was the inflexible, jerky motion of Humongous's attack, which
gave them a split second's forewarning of where the next annihilating
crash was aimed. It was only a matter of time before they got it
wrong, and Humongous seemed to have all the time he needed trampling
after them around the closed courtyard and evidently not wearied by
the atrocious energy of his onslaught. 

In a brief moment between one blow and the next, Sir Didymus spotted
a movement along the parapet of the wall. "Look!" he panted, and
pointed. It was nearly fatal. 

"Watch out!" Sarah screamed, and the three of them dived
simultaneously sideways as the ax whistled and crashed down again,
raising a spray of fragmented paving stones. 

While Humongous was lining up his next swipe, Sarah saw what the
movement on the parapet was. Hoggle was running nimbly along the
battlements, toward the arch over the inner gates. 

"Hoggle!" Sarah yelled in encouragement, before sprinting between
Humongous's feet and out of the way. 

It was obscure what assistance Hoggle could bring them, but he was
scrambling so urgently up the arch that he clearly had some purpose
in mind. 

Humongous shifted his feet, like armored tanks, to get in his next
blow. In doing so, he positioned himself with his back to the inner
gates. 

Sarah saw Hoggle, now on top of the arch, crouching, prepared to jump
down on the horned helmet of the giant. She covered her face with her
hands, terrified, and peeped through her fingers. What hopeless
heroism it was in Hoggle, like a fly attacking a locomotive. 

With a triumphant shriek, Hoggle landed on Humongous's shoulders. 

"Hoggle!" Sarah whispered, as she took off to avoid another
thunderous stroke. 

Hoggle balanced on one leg, and kicked the giant's helmet. The top
half of it flew open, on a hinge. Inside Humongous's head, a tiny
goblin in a white lab coat, with eyes staring madly through thick
lenses, was feverishly working a bank of levers. Hoggle reached down,
grabbed the goblin under the armpits, and hurled him away. He landed
haplessly on the flagstones of the courtyard and groped for his
smashed spectacles. 

Already Hoggle had jumped down inside the giant's head, and was
operating the levers there as though he had always been the engineer.
Perhaps he did know what he was doing, or perhaps he tugged the
levers at random. The result was that, Humongous, elbows by his sides
and arms raised robotically level, went into a convulsion. His feet
did a shuffling sort of dance, his torso swayed from side to side,
the ax jerked rapidly up and down, and his neck swiveled faster and
faster. Hoggle pulled more levers and then had to make a wild jump
for it, as Humongous went careering off blindly, with his ax
oscillating and steam spurting from his joints. 

Hoggle landed in a heap at Sarah's feet. She helped him up, but had
no time to speak to him yet. Humongous was now rampaging around the
courtyard like a mad bull, bouncing off the walls. His ax was lashing
up and down on a long vertical axis, pulverizing the paving stones
when it landed, and crunching into his own back on the reverse
stroke. 

The giant's random movements eventually brought him back to the inner
gates, where he had started. On its next backward swing, the ax
penetrated deep into the cleft between two stones in the arch. It
stuck there. In consequence, Humongous's next attempt at a mighty
downstroke was converted into a terrifying leverage upward of his
whole body. He was too heavy for his feet to leave the ground. What
might have happened was that the ax could have snapped, or the wall
collapsed. What did happen was that Humongous bent at the knees and
sagged at the waist, looking like a failed giant hammer-thrower, and
little blue sparks shot up and down his armor as his circuits
overloaded. 

"Are you all right?" Sarah asked Hoggle, bending over to fuss over
any bruises he might have. 

Hoggle retreated a few paces and stood with his face inclined. "I'm
not asking to be forgiven," he said obstinately. "I ain't ashamed of
nothin' I did. I don't care what you thinks of me." He was toeing a
little stone around with his boot, his eyes fixed on it. "I told you
I was a coward. Now you sees I was only tellin' the truth. And I
ain't interested in bein' friends ..." 

"I forgive you, Hoggle," Sarah said, simply. 

Hoggle cocked his gnomish head and looked at her from under one bushy
eyebrow. "You do?" he asked in a small voice. 

Sir Didymus strode across and slapped Hoggle's shoulder. "And I
commend thee," he said, with his other hand resting on his staff.
"Seldom have I seen such courage. Sir Galahad himself will be
impressed when word reaches his ears. We owe to thee our lives. Thou
art the fragrant bloom of knightly valor, Sir Hoggle." 

"I am?" 

Ludo paid his tribute. "Hoggle -- Ludo -- friends." 

"We are?" Hoggle agreed uncertainly. 

Sarah had unfastened the string of baubles she had taken from Hoggle
in the hedge maze -- so long ago, it seemed -- and handed them back
to him. "Here are your things, Hoggle. And thank you for your help." 

Hoggle took the jewels and gazed down at them. Then he looked up with
a puckered grin. "Well," he said, and started to stride toward the
inner gates, "what are we waiting for?" 

Sir Didymus called, "Ambrosius!" His steed poked his nose cautiously
around the buttress behind which he had been hiding. 

"Ambrosius!" Sir Didymus raised his voice impatiently. Ambrosius did
not so much trot as sidle up to his master. 

When the knight was mounted up, the party made its way carefully
around the massive shape of Humongous. The blue sparks were still
fizzing. 

Sir Didymus enthusiastically overtook Hoggle and beat upon the inner
gates with his staff. Hoggle pushed. Neither of them could get the
gates open, but it was an easy job for Ludo. Without Humongous, they
were no more than a pair of heavy doors leading to Goblin City. 

* * * * * * * * * * * * *

Jareth was lounging on his throne, propped up on one elbow. Beside
him was Toby. Goblins stood around, watching them play together, and
wishing that they had Toby to play with. It looked like fun. Jareth
would tickle Toby, and whenever he was within range the baby would
punch Jareth in the face. The game had been going on for some time. 

Jareth chuckled. "Spirited little fellow." In more senses than one,
he thought, but why bother to say it when all you've got in the
audience are goblins? He nodded. "I think I'll call him Jareth. He's
got my eyes." 

Toby smacked him in one of them. 

"And my disposition," Jareth added. 

A goblin came running into the chamber, tripped on a chicken carcass,
fell flat on his face, and from there delivered his message. "Your
Highness! The girl!" 

Jareth glanced up laconically. "What?" 

The goblin was picking himself up. "The girl who ate the peach and
forgot everything?" 

"Yes, yes," Jareth said testily. As though he had had more than one
girl on his mind lately. "What of her?" 

The goblin's eyes were boggling, and he had one arm flung out behind
him, pointing. "She's here." 

"Hm?" Jareth stopped tickling Toby and scrutinized the moronic
messenger. 

"She's here, your Highness! With the monster, and Sir Didymus, and
the gnome who's in your employ." 

"Here?" 

"They've gotten through the gates." 

"What?" Jareth barked. 

"The girl who ate the peach and --" 

"Yes!" Jareth's face was working. "She got past Humongous?" 

"Yes, your Highness. He's blown his fuses." 

"Blown his -- where are they?" 

"They're on their way to the castle." 

Jareth stood up, holding Toby, who wriggled. "Stop her!" the Goblin
King commanded. "Call out the guard!" 

The goblins milled around the chamber, screeching, "Call out the
guard!" at each other. 

"Don't mill," Jareth told them. "Do something. She must be stopped." 

As one goblin, they all dashed for the door. 

"Wait!" Jareth shouted. Carrying Toby, he strode over to them and
handed the baby to one of them. "Here," he said, "take Jarethkin. She
must not get the baby." 

The goblin with Toby ran off one way, while the rest rushed off to
raise the alarm. 

Jareth was left alone. "She must not get the baby," he repeated to
himself. "She must be stopped."

************* ************* ************* *************

Chapter Seventeen
Saints and Whiskers

Goblin City was a shantytown, numbering about ten blocks of
ramshackle houses, hiding in each other's shadows, with winding lanes
between them. The buildings rose to sharply pointed eaves or conical
thatch roofs. The windows penetrating the walls were so
higgledy-piggledy that from the outside you might wonder if the
houses had floors at all. Most of the buildings were decorated in the
Goblin Grotesque style, timber trimmed to a rising point like a waxed
mustache, goblinomorphic feet or horns carved into a pediment. The
cat-prowled lanes were littered with scraps of food tossed from the
windows, and other garbage so rotten that it would be an unsavory
task to analyze what it had once been. 

The place was huddled in the shadow of the castle, which rose behind
it in bonnet-towered and turreted splendor. A wide flight of steps,
the main entrance to the castle, faced the inner gates of the
courtyard, and must have formed an imposing approach before the
shantytown had risen up to interrupt the vista. 

Sir Didymus on Ambrosius, Hoggle, Sarah, and Ludo tiptoed through the
marketplace just inside the gates. It was dawn and the city was
apparently fast asleep. Seeing the castle looming up ahead of them,
they made their way quietly through the lanes toward it. Here and
there they crept past a snoozing goblin, propped against a wall. 

Sir Didymus cleared his throat and announced, loudly, "This stealth
is alien to my nature." 

"Ssshhh!" Sarah told him. 

"Quiet, yer windbag!" Hoggle added, in a growl. 

"Sorry, fair maid," Sir Didymus apologized, in a voice hardly lowered
at all. "I know not the word fear." 

"I know," Sarah answered, "but I do." 

"And I does, too," Hoggle added. "Shush!" 

Beyond the shantytown, they came into an open square. The steps up to
the castle were on the far side. Everything was still eerily quiet.
They began to walk softly toward the steps. 

Sarah's heart was pounding. "We're going to make it," she whispered. 

"Piece of cake," Hoggle told her. 

He should have known better. When he had heard her use that phrase,
the penalty had been the slashing machine. This time, it was war. A
bugle sounded, and from both sides of the square the goblin army
suddenly came charging at them, with pounding feet and clanking armor
and a weird, ululating war cry. Scores of helmeted heads could be
seen scuttling along the lower ramparts of the castle. There was only
one thing to do: run for it. And there was only one way to run --
back into town. 

The armies were issuing from twin corridors, which curved around the
sides of the main steps so that their exits faced each other. A
platoon of bombardiers trundled a cannon in the vanguard of each
army, and as the corridors were on an incline, and the cannons were
heavy, and the trundling was enthusiastic, the cannon platoons were
going to collide unless they hauled back hard. Which they did.
Unavailingly, however, for the press of infantry and cavalry behind
them drove them inexorably on. As the four invaders raced for the
cover of the town, they heard a stupendous smash, like a thousand
empty cans crashing together. They turned around, and watched wave
upon wave of the goblin soldiers piling upon top of each other. On
the ramparts, an inaudible bugler was red in the face with blowing
the charge. 

Jareth was standing perpendicular at a window of the castle, watching
the action. He winced, almost imperceptibly. 

Hoggle led Sarah, Ludo, and the mounted Sir Didymus in a sprint along
the mazy lanes of the town. Goblin heads popped out of the windows
above them to watch. Sir Didymus was protesting, "We must stand and
fight them face to face. It is the only honorable ..." 

Hoggle suddenly stopped, his arms spread wide in warning. The rest
halted behind him. At the far end of the street, a detachment of
goblins appeared facing them, spiky with spears. 

"Uh-oh," Sarah muttered. "This could be it." 

"Fear not, sweet damsel," Sir Didymus told her. "These puny goblins
are no match for Sir Didymus." He raised his staff, and was about to
charge the army single-handed when Ambrosius wheeled around and
bolted again. This time, his rider managed to stay in the saddle and,
after touring the streets, brought Ambrosius back to where they had
started. 

Sarah called urgently from a doorway. "In here!" 

She had found a deserted house in which to make a stand. It was built
like a tower. 

Reluctantly, Sir Didymus dismounted and led Ambrosius inside. Sarah
slid the bolt. She was grinning with excitement. However extreme the
peril they were in, nothing would ever be as daunting as the old junk
woman. "You hold the doorway," she told Sir Didymus. "Hoggle and I
will guard that window. And you, Ludo -- up on the roof." 

Ludo nodded obediently. "Ludo -- up." He climbed the winding rungs of
the stairs. 

"Look out!" Sarah cried suddenly. On the wall of the room, she had
seen goblin shadows, snouted and horned, cast through the window by
the rising sun. Sir Didymus at once took up his on-guard position
beside the door. Sarah and Hoggle stood by a dresser full of china. 

Sarah called up the staircase. "Ludo, are you ready?" 

"Ludo -- ready." 

A goblin smashed the window with his pike, and stuck his head inside
to see who was in there. Sarah, standing to one side of the window,
brought a dinner plate down upon his head. He collapsed onto the
windowsill and rolled outside. 

Another took his place. Another plate served the same purpose. 

At once, a third head was poked in. This one had time to peer at the
defenders. "Hoggle!" the goblin exclaimed. "You used to be with us." 

"Yes," Hoggle agreed, and broke a teapot on the goblin's helmeted
head. 

Another ugly head took its turn at the window, and another, and as
fast as their pointed ears and jagged teeth appeared they were
stunned by Sarah or Hoggle. 

Sir Didymus was watching with mixed feeling. He had to hand it to the
girl, she was doughty, and she might make a decent commander of horse
one day. On the other hand, she had posted her most valorous knight
inside a bolted wooden door, where nothing at all was going to
happen. Inexperience, that was all it was. He was wondering whether
to disobey orders and join them at the window when an axhead shaped
like a trefoil splintered the door. Through the crack it had made, he
saw mad red eyes watching him and heard voices talking rapidly. 

This was more like it. He squared up. Then, through the crack, he saw
half a dozen goblins charging with a battering ram. In a trice, he
slid the bolt back and opened the door. As the ram went past him at
full tilt he dealt with each of its bearers adroitly with a thrust of
his trusty staff. "Have at thee!" he hollered excitedly. "En garde,
sirrah!" 

He slammed the door shut and bolted it again, and was trying to use
the battering ram to shore up the splintered door when it was burst
open by a fresh squad of goblins. He had no time to grab his staff.
They leaped upon him, pinioned him face down to the ground, and,
holding his hair, began to bash his nose on the floor. After a while,
they paused to examine their work. 

"Ha!" Sir Didymus shouted tauntingly. "Had enough, have ye? Craven
curs, how little it takes to subdue varlets such as ye are!" 

They started to give him another bashing for that, but Sarah had seen
what was going on. A well-aimed chamber pot sent the goblins flying,
and in a moment Sir Didymus was standing over them. "Saints and
whiskers!" he exclaimed. "Is it worth splintering my staff to
dispatch the likes of ye?" 

Sarah and Hoggle were still holding the window, but their reserve of
crockery was running low, and the horde of goblins was not abating.
When there were no more dinner plates, jugs, or soup bowls, they had
to use teacups and saucers, but sometimes it took two of those to
deal with each goblin. 

Another one of them had time to recognize Hoggle. "What have we done
to you?" the goblin asked. 

"Not me," Hoggle replied. "Her -- you stole her baby brother." 

"So we stole a baby! That's what goblins do. You know that, Hog --" 

His sentence was ended by a soup tureen that Hoggle had been saving
for a special occasion. 

On the roof of the tower, Ludo was showered with spears. He simply
ducked below the parapet. Then a detachment of commando goblins
stormed the outside walls of the tower, clambering up ladders with
the idea of overwhelming Ludo. He was not readily overwhelmable,
kicking them down to the ground one by one as they reached the top of
the ladders and peered over the parapet. The artillery was called up.
From a cannon, a goblin with a spiked helmet was fired at Ludo. The
outcome was that the goblin's helmet was impaled in the mud wall of a
nearby house, leaving him stuck out behind it, flapping his limbs. 

Sir Didymus was listening keenly. Outside the door, he could hear two
goblins conversing. "She's got brains," one said. 

"Yes," the other replied. "I could do with brains like hers." 

"So could I," the first said. "To eat!" 

Sir Didymus was incensed. To hear them impugning so beautiful a
damsel without mercy was more than his knightly honor could tolerate.
Throwing open the door and leaping on Ambrosius's back, he cried, "Ye
Goths and Vandals! Have at ye, then, for the foul blasphemers that ye
are of a maiden's virtue." 

Sarah looked across and saw Sir Didymus level his staff and charge
out. 

"No!" she cried. It was too late. 

Sir Didymus came back a moment later, on his back, head first.
Ambrosius followed at a gallop. 

The peerless knight-in-arms was up and at them in an instant. This
time, Ambrosius bolted with him all around the town again, until they
came face to face with a bristling line of spears. More spears
appeared behind them in the narrow lane. 

"Don't worry, Ambrosius," Sir Didymus told him. "I think we've got
them surrounded." 

With a dazzlingly rapid series of thrusts, parries, and flicks, he
disarmed all the adversaries in front of him, and charged
triumphantly forward into a low porch beam, which unseated him from
the saddle. By the time he was on his feet, he was hemmed in by spear
points. 

"Ha!" he snarled. "Can't take any more, eh? Very well. Throw down
your weapons, and I'll see to it that you're well treated." 

As the spears came down at him, he ran up one of them and vaulted
back into the saddle, which unfortunately was no longer there,
Ambrosius having once again taken the sensible course of action. 

Meanwhile, Sarah had an idea. "Ludo," she shouted, "call the rocks!" 

The noise of the battle was too loud for Ludo, at the top of the
house, to hear her. She would have to go up to him. "Hoggle,
retreat!" she called. "Up the stairs." 

"You first," he called back. 

She did as he said. Hoggle followed her. 

Sir Didymus, hard pressed, ran into the house just in time to cover
their retreat. He came up the stairs backward, ceding one step at a
time, fending off his attackers with cut and passado. 

Sarah raced up to the top of the tower. "Ludo," she panted. "Call the
rocks. Call the rocks, Ludo." 

Ludo did not need the second bidding. He threw his great head back,
closed his eyes, and bellowed longer and louder than an alpine horn. 

The tower quivered and the earth shuddered. A distant rumbling was
heard. Bits fell off the castle walls. 

While they were waiting for the rocks to arrive, their immediate
position was perilous. Sir Didymus could not hold back the invaders
for much longer. Ludo had kicked away the scaling ladders, and so
they were going to be trapped at the top of the tower unless there
was some way down the outside. Not even Ludo's friends the rocks
could help them up there. 

Sarah looked over the parapet. All the goblins were congregated at
the front of the house, struggling to get in after those who were
forcing Sir Didymus back. The lane behind the house was empty, which
gave Sarah an idea. 

Just below the tower roof she had passed a room with two beds in it.
The goblins had not yet advanced that far. She ran down. "Hold them
back for as long as you can, Sir Didymus," she called. 

"'Twill be the greatest pleasure of my life, fair maid," he called
back up to her. 

Swiftly, Sarah knotted sheets and blankets together in a rope. Then
she ran back up to the tower roof, tied one end of the rope to a
column of the parapet and threw the rest over the side. She looked
down and was relieved to see it reached nearly to the ground. "You
first, Hoggle," she said. 

He hesitated. "I'm a coward." 

"No, you're not." 

He paused, almost smiling. "You're right. I'm not. Funny, I always
thought I was." He grasped the rope, stood on the parapet, and
shinned down to the ground. Then he held the rope to anchor it for
Sarah. She followed him down. 

"Ludo!" she called. "You next! Tell Sir Didymus to come after you." 

Seeing the bulk of Ludo loom above the parapet, she crossed her
fingers and prayed that the rope would bear his weight. She could
barely watch. 

It was all right. Ludo came down, a little too fast, scorching his
paws, but he landed safely on the ground. 

Now it was for Sir Didymus to make good his escape. The three of
them, their heads craned back, saw the tiny puissant chevalier come
onto the parapet with his back turned and his staff arm working hard.
With his free hand he took hold of the rope and let himself a few
inches down the outside of the tower. Then they saw him raise his
staff and unhitch the rope from the parapet. He plummeted. 

Sarah pressed her hands to her cheeks. Her mouth opened in horror. 

But the resourceful knight knew what he was doing. With his staff
hand he grabbed the other side of the sheet, and spread his arms
wide. The air filled the sheet, and he parachuted gently down beside
his friends. 

Sarah used the breath she had been holding to gasp, "Sir Didymus!
What did you do that for?" 

"Prithee, sweet damsel," Sir Didymus answered, "wilt thou raise thy
lovely eyes aloft?" 

Sarah looked up, and saw a ring of baffled goblin faces staring
angrily down from the top of the tower. 

"Thou wouldst not have wished them to join our company, wouldst
thou?" Sir Didymus asked, his eyes twinkling. 

During their escape, the rumbling of the rocks had grown into an
oceanic roar. They came rolling across the plain by the hundreds,
answering Ludo's call, and when they hit the outer walls of the city
they built themselves up until the next to arrive could just roll up
the slope and vault inside. Soon they filled the streets, knocking
goblins down like tenpins and ruthlessly pursuing those who fled.
There was no hiding place. The boulders crashed through the doors of
houses where the army had taken cover, and when the goblins jumped
spread-eagled out of windows, the rocks were close behind them. Whole
platoons of goblins were walled up by rocks stacked against doors. 

The artillery commander, knowing no other way to fight, ordered the
cannon to be loaded and discharged at the invaders. Just as the fuse
was ignited, a rock stuffed itself into the mouth of the cannon,
which exploded, leaving the commander a blackened, ragged scarecrow. 

Sarah led her friends back through the chaotic town to the square in
front of the castle. A couple of stray halberdiers boldly confronted
them before the steps. From behind them, Sarah heard a loud rumbling.
She whipped around and screamed. A boulder was rolling at them. It
leapfrogged them and dropped splat on the halberdiers. 

"Rocks -- friends," Ludo remarked, with a touch of pride. 

At the top of the steps was a tall, narrow, grotesquely carved door,
the ceremonial entrance. Sarah pushed at it. It was locked and solid. 

Ludo walked past her and broke the door down as though it were
matchwood. 

Inside the castle, a grand corridor ran ahead of them, and at the far
end of it, through an open door, they could see the throne, with the
vulture squatting above it. 

"Toby," Sarah whispered, and ran to fetch him. If Jareth were there,
he could not stop her now. Nothing could. 

The chamber was deserted. In the middle of it was a cradle, empty.
The clock showed three minutes to thirteen. On his perch, the vulture
shifted from foot to foot. He opened his beak and made a noise like
ghastly laughter.

************* ************* ************* *************

Chapter Eighteen
Seeming

"Toby," Sarah whispered again, gazing down at the empty cradle. 

Sir Didymus was looking from her face to the cradle. He lifted the
blanket and the pillow, searching beneath them, and shook his head.
"An exceptionally small knight is Sir Tobias. I cannot even see him." 

"He's gone," Sarah said. "Jareth has taken him." 

The vulture made a dry cackling noise. 

Sarah knew that Jareth would not have abandoned the castle. He had to
be here somewhere, and so had Toby. The sole exit from the chamber,
apart from the way they had come, was a flight of stairs to one side
of the throne. She could not see where it led because the passage
turned a corner, but a lovely glowing light was emanating from it.
"That's the only way he could have gone," Sarah said. 

She ran toward it, taking care to avoid stepping on the half-gnawed
chicken bones, rotting tomatoes, squashed pears, and other garbage
that littered the floor. Sir Didymus, Hoggle, and Ludo ran after her. 

"No," she said, when she reached the first stair. She turned around
and told her friends, "I ... I have to face him alone." 

Sir Didymus, already rehearsing his lunge and parry as he ran, was
disconcerted. "Why?" he asked. 

"Because ..." It was a good question. "Because that's the way it's
done," Sarah replied. 

"Who says?" Hoggle asked. 

"They all do," Sarah told him. "The stories, all of them." 

The three of them regarded her for some time. Seeing the
disappointment on their faces, Sarah felt wretched. But she knew that
she was right. 

At length, Sir Didymus said, slowly, "Well, if that is the way 'tis
done, then that is how thou must needs do it." He raised his staff
and squinted along it. "But shouldst thou have need of us ..." 

"Yes," Hoggle added, "if you need us ..." 

"I'll call," Sarah promised. "Thank you. All of you." She smiled,
feeling awkward with gratitude. 

The she turned and ran up the stairs, toward the glowing light. 

It was a long staircase and turned through several angles. She was
puffing by the time she reached the top and emerged onto a stone
platform. What she saw took all her breath away. 

Above, below, or around her -- which, she could not tell -- was a
vast stone hall, with so many staircases, balconies, windows, and
doorways at different heights and odd angles to each other that she
had no idea what was up or down, near or far, inside or out, backward
or forward. Planes reversed themselves as you watched them, receding
corners suddenly jutted out, rising steps inverted themselves, floors
became ceilings, and walls turned into precipices. In this room, it
seemed that the law of gravity had been repealed, and perspective had
seven dimensions. If there had been water, it would have seemed to
flow uphill. She felt sick and giddy, and had to cling to a pillar to
remain upright. "It's impossible," she whispered to herself. As long
as she went on looking at the hall, it went on altering. Does it
still go on altering, she wondered dizzily, when no one is looking at
it? 

With her back to the wall, she edged along the platform. If I take it
step by step, she was thinking, I will get there. If there isa there.
She edged along, hoping that it was along and not up or past or
through, until she came to a point that she was quite certain was
where she had started. Yes, there was the top of the staircase behind
her. She began to edge the other way, until she heard a voice from
somewhere below. She knew whose voice it was. 

"I've been expecting you," it said. 

With a deep breath, she inched to the edge of the platform. Beyond
her, apparently sitting on a vertical wall, was Jareth. 

"Where's Toby?" Sarah asked. 

"He's safe. In my keeping." 

"You're not keeping him." 

"Oh. And why not?" 

"I have come this far. I am here." 

Jareth chuckled. "Sheer luck." 

"I am here. Give me Toby back." 

"You have understood nothing," Jareth told her. "You have answered
none of the Labyrinth's riddles. You don't even know what the
questions were." 

"That wasn't our bargain." 

Jareth threw back his head and laughed. "There, just as I told you.
You have understood nothing." 

"You are wrong. I have come to understand one thing very well. You
are just putting on a show of confidence. It doesn't take me in
anymore. You are frightened, Jareth." 

"So are you." 

"Yes." 

For a few seconds, they were watching each other's eyes. 

Then Jareth began to move, all over the seven perspectives, and Sarah
watched him as he moved. He seemed to walk along ceilings and climb
descending stairs. He danced on high walls. And as he moved he called
to her, "You are cruel, Sarah. We are well matched, you and I. I need
your cruelty, just as you need mine." 

Watching him, Sarah felt her knees start to wobble. She had fallen
for his trick. She had no idea now whether she was looking up or
down, whether the platform where she stood was solid or void.
Everything switched continually, like a photographic negative at an
angle to the light. She held her arms out for balance, but it was no
good. She stumbled, her head spinning, and felt herself topple. She
landed on a ceiling, and tried to adjust her senses. Shakily, she
stood up. 

Then she saw Toby. He was crawling up a flight of stairs, still in
his striped pajamas. 

"Toby!" she called. 

The baby did not respond. 

"Toby!" she shouted. 

The only answer she got was Jareth's laughter. 

Somehow, she had to reach Toby. She began to work her way down a
flight of stairs. A movement below her caught her attention. She
peered beneath the stairs and saw Jareth walking parallel to her,
apparently upside down, like a reflection in ice. Or maybe she was
upside down. She ran to get away from him, to get to Toby. Jareth
mirrored her wherever she went. She ran along a balcony, and suddenly
he appeared at the far end of it, upright. She turned, ran back, and
fell. She landed with a bruising thud. Jareth was watching her,
laughing. 

"I will reach him," Sarah said to Jareth. 

Instead of answering, Jareth produced a crystal ball and tossed it up
a flight of stairs. Sarah's eyes followed it, and she saw it land
near Toby, who was happily climbing on hands and knees up another
staircase. 

"Toby!" she cried in alarm. 

The baby was fascinated by the bouncing ball. He reached for it, and
when it passed him he scuttled after it. Sarah saw him approaching
the edge of a precipitous fall. 

"No!" she called out. "Oh, no! Toby!" 

Toby went over the edge and crawled down the vertical wall, still
chasing the ball, which was bouncing around crazily in defiance of
all laws of motion. 

Sarah blinked. It was impossible. Jareth laughed. 

She started to follow a line of stairs that went in the direction of
Toby. As she drew near him, the baby crawled after the ball in
another plane, leaving her stranded. She followed him again, and the
same thing happened, and again. He was moving on an axis with which
she could not intersect. And everywhere he crawled, he seemed to be
at risk of falling from a balcony, or tumbling all the way down a
flight of stone stairs. 

Suddenly, Jareth appeared behind her. He laid his hands on her
shoulders and spun her around. She was too weak to resist him. His
face, as he looked into hers, was amused. It said: It's been a fine
game, Sarah, and now it's time to finish playing, because you cannot
ever win. 

In the corner of her eye, she saw a small movement. Toby was crawling
toward a window ledge. She shrugged Jareth's hands from her shoulders
and stared at her brother. There could be no optical doubt about it
this time. Outside the window, birds were flying in the sunlight, and
Toby was clambering up onto the ledge. Between her and the baby was a
vast space of the hall. He was teetering on the ledge now, trying to
stand up. She could not run to him, even supposing she were able to
find a path to him through the deceiving planes. It was possible, she
could not be sure, that he was below her, and that she could reach
him with a jump; a jump so deep that she would crack every bone in
her body. 

Jareth was smiling triumphantly at her. This was how her quest ended.
If he could not keep the baby, nor would she. She watched Toby totter
on his precarious perch, and a small cry came from her lips. 

She closed her eyes and jumped. 

* * * * * * * * * * * * *

When she opened her eyes, she was not sure where she was. It could
have been another part of the hall. She thought she recognized it,
but could not place it. 

Yet something had changed. Near her was an ogee window, without
glass, and through it she could see the upper half of one wing of the
castle. It was in ruins, the cladding stones mostly gone, grass
growing in the gaps they'd left. The turret roofs had collapsed, and
brambles were reaching for the throat of the tower. Within the
castle, where she was, she heard in the air the humming that she had
come to associate with Jareth, but it had a hollow ring to it,
something forlorn, like music in an abandoned house. In the crack
between two flagstones where she lay she saw that weeds had started
to push their way through. She stood up and looked around. There was
no sign of Toby. 

Jareth stepped out from a shadowy archway, wearing a faded,
threadbare cloak. His face looked older, drawn. In his blond mane was
a trace of gray. 

How long had she been here? She detected no change in herself. 

Jareth was waiting for her with his arms folded. She advanced upon
him. "Give me the child," she said. 

He paused before answering. "Sarah -- beware. I have been generous
until now, but I can be cruel." 

"Generous!" She advanced another step. "What have you done that was
generous?" 

"Everything. I have done everything you wanted." He took a pace back,
into the shadow of the archway. "You asked that the child be taken. I
took him. You cowered before me. I was frightening." 

Taking another step away from her, he gestured in the air. "I have
reordered time," he told her. The thirteen-hour clock had appeared,
floating above his head. Its hands were whirling around. "I have
turned the world upside down." 

Sarah continued to advance upon him, her arms outreached. He
retreated deeper into the shadows. 

"And I have done it all for you," he said with a shake of his head.
"I am exhausted from living up to your expectations. Isn't that
generous? Stay back!" He raised his hands as though to fend her off
and took another pace away from her. In a louder voice, he repeated,
"Stay back!" 

Sarah's lips were parted. "Through dangers untold and hardships
unnumbered, I have fought my way here to the castle beyond the Goblin
City --" 

"Listen!" said a goblin, one of a nest in a dark corner of the
castle. 

Jareth was retreating step by step up a staircase behind the archway. 

Sarah continued to advance, into the archway. 

"-- to take back the child you have stolen," she repeated. "For my
will is as strong as yours --" 

"Stop!" Jareth raised the palm of his hand to her. "Wait! Sarah, look
-- look what I can offer you." He raised his left arm and made a
large gesture with his hand. A glowing crystal ball appeared in it.
He spun it around in his fingers, smiled wanly, and said, "It will
show you your dreams. You remember." 

Sarah took another step. 

"-- and my kingdom as great --" 

"She's going to say it," a goblin hissed. 

"She's going to say the words," gabbled another, agitatedly. 

The stairs behind Jareth were descending now, and he backed slowly
down them as Sarah stood above him. "I ask so little," he said,
spinning the crystal. "Just believe in me, and you can have
everything you want ... everything you have ever dreamed of ... your
dreams, Sarah ..." 

She was frowning, and had halted her advance. "... and my kingdom as
great ...," she said. "Damn!" 

A goblin shook his head decisively. "That's not it. Never." 

"Sshh!" said another. 

Sarah's fists were clenched white. She was thinking frantically. What
were her right words? 

Jareth took a step toward her. He need her belief in him. "Just fear
me and love me," he told her in a gentle voice, "and do as I say, and
I ... I will be your slave." He stretched his hand out toward her,
and took another step back up the stairs. 

"Nah." A goblin shook his hideous head. "Doesn't look like it now,
does it?" 

Jareth's fingers were close to Sarah's face. 

She stood where she was, and swallowed. "Kingdom as great ...," she
muttered, " ... kingdom as great ..." She saw the crystal spinning in
his fingers, and felt on her lips the warmth of his outstretched
hand. She gasped, and, from some inspired recess of her mind, the
words came out, blurted out. 

"You have no power over me." 

"No!" Jareth screamed. 

"No!" the goblins exclaimed, astounded. 

A clock began to strike. 

Jareth tossed the crystal ball up into the air, where it hovered, a
bubble. Sarah looked at it, and saw Jareth's face, distorted, on the
shifting, iridescent surface. Gently, it drifted down toward her. She
reached out fascinated fingers for it and, as she touched the bubble
with her fingertips, it burst. A mist of water atoms floated down the
air toward Jareth. 

But she saw that Jareth had disappeared. She heard his voice, for a
last time, moaning, "Sarah ... Sarah ..." 

His empty cloak was settling onto the ground. A beam of light picked
out a little cloud of dust motes rising from it. 

The clock continued to strike. 

With a last, slow flutter, the cloak lay still. From beneath it, as
the clock struck for the twelfth time, a white owl flew out and
circled over Sarah. 

Tears were trickling down her cheeks. 

************* ************* ************* *************

Chapter Nineteen
Good Night

Sarah closed her eyes to stem the tears and brushed her cheeks with
the palms of her hands. "I must stop this habit of crying," she said
aloud, as a distraction from her sadness. "I must also stop gasping,
gulping, trembling, shouting, and generally going over the top when
..." Then she remembered that she had not found Toby again, and she
opened her eyes in alarm. 

The white owl was still flapping above her, but in other respects the
scene had changed. She was standing on the staircase of her home, and
it was dark outside. 

She raised her eyes to look at the owl. It circled her for a last
time, found an open window, and flew out into the night. Then she was
running up the stairs two at a time, shouting, "Toby! Toby!" 

He was in his crib, fast asleep. She could not help but pick him up
and cuddle him. He opened his eyes dozily, thought about crying, but
decided that he was in good enough shape without it, so he smiled
instead. Sarah picked up Launcelot from the floor and put the teddy
bear in his arms, saying, "Here you are, Toby. He's yours." Then she
tucked him into his crib again. He went straight to sleep. 

She stayed there with him for a long time, watching him breathe
peacefully, with Launcelot in his arms. 

Back in her own room, the full moon was shining outside her window.
She left the curtains open, to see it. If she went to bed quickly, it
would still be shining in when she turned the light out. The alarm
clock by her bed showed that the time was after midnight. Her parents
would be back from the show any minute now. 

She sat at her dressing table and picked up a hairbrush, but her
attention wandered to the photographs she had around the mirror, her
mother and Jeremy, smiling at each other like young lovers, the
signed posters, the gossip stories about romantic attachment.
Deliberately, she began to remove one picture after another from the
mirror. She glanced at each one before putting it away in a drawer. 

On the dressing table one picture remained, of her father and mother
and herself, aged ten. Sarah straightened the picture. Then she went
to get the music box and put it in the drawer along with the pictures
and clippings, shoved far back. 

Downstairs, she heard the front door open and close. Her stepmother
called, "Sarah?" 

She didn't answer at once. She was holding her copy of The Labyrinth. 

"Sarah?" 

"Wait," Sarah whispered. "I am closing a chapter of my life. Just
wait." She paused, and added, still in a whisper, "Please." She put
the book in the drawer with all the rest, and stood with her hand on
it there. 

"Sarah!" 

Sarah left it a moment, then called back, "Yes. Yes, I'm here." She
looked at the drawer, and sighed. "Welcome back," she called. 

"What?" Her stepmother, taking her coat off downstairs, paused,
puzzled. "What did you say?" she called up. 

Sarah opened her mouth, and closed it again. Once was enough, she
thought. Once was all right. Any more would be overweening. I nearly
overwent there, she smiled to herself, and pushed the drawer shut. 

She straightened up, and on the dark window saw her reflection
against the moonlight. Behind her reflection was Ludo. 

"Ludo -- good-bye -- Sarah," he said. 

She spun around with a cry of joy. The room was empty. 

She checked the window again. Sir Didymus was there. 

"And remember, sweetest damsel, shouldst thou ever have need ..." 

"I'll call," she told him. She glanced around the room again. Empty,
of course. 

Sir Didymus was hurrying back into the window pane. "I forgot to say,
also, that if ever thou shouldst think on marriage ..." 

"I understand," Sarah told him. "Good-bye, brave Sir Didymus." 

He faded. Sarah kept her eyes on the window. She did not have long to
wait. Hoggle popped up from behind the bed. "Yes, if you ever need us
... for any reason at all ..." He stared at her from under his bushy
eyebrows, and started to fade. 

"Hoggle," Sarah said, "I need you. I need you all." 

"Sometimes," the Wise Man observed, "to need is ... to let go." 

"Oh, wow!" said his hat. "And that's just for starters." 

Outside the dark window, the white owl had been perched with his
claws hooked on a branch, an effigy of watching and waiting. Now he
swooped away over the park, on silent velvet wings, up toward the
full moon. Nobody saw him, white in the moonlight, black against the
stars.
--



Sarah whimpered. She felt the ground tremble as Humongous, ax raised,
detached himself from the doors and stamped toward them. Beside her,
she heard Ludo roar, but it was a mere piping sound in comparison to
the terrible noise made by this Goliath goblin. 

Ambrosius took one look and sensibly bolted. Sir Didymus, dumped on
the ground, furiously ordered his steed to return. Ambrosius was
having none of it. He lurked behind a buttress. 

"Pshaw!" Sir Didymus clicked his fingers in irritation. "Were yon
warrior and I to joust with lances, I would make short work of him." 

Humongous was not yon now. He had come close enough to aim a massive
ax blow at the trio. It missed them, but gashed a great wound in the
stone wall. A fountain of sparks spurted from the steel axhead. 

The three dodged past Humongous's feet, but he jerked rapidly around
and smashed his ax down again with both hands. Screaming, they leaped
apart, and the ax hammered the ground between them, burying itself
among shattered paving stones. The giant withdrew it effortlessly,
and now, crouching, he delivered a scything swing at them. The threw
themselves flat, and heard the ax whiz over them with a noise like an
ignited rocket. 

They saw the ax raised high again, and scuttled for cover to the wall
of the courtyard. The descending ax carved a slice off a buttress.
Blow followed blow. Each one would have left no more of them than
there is of a mosquito squashed on a wall. All that had saved them so
far was the inflexible, jerky motion of Humongous's attack, which
gave them a split second's forewarning of where the next annihilating
crash was aimed. It was only a matter of time before they got it
wrong, and Humongous seemed to have all the time he needed trampling
after them around the closed courtyard and evidently not wearied by
the atrocious energy of his onslaught. 

In a brief moment between one blow and the next, Sir Didymus spotted
a movement along the parapet of the wall. "Look!" he panted, and
pointed. It was nearly fatal. 

"Watch out!" Sarah screamed, and the three of them dived
simultaneously sideways as the ax whistled and crashed down again,
raising a spray of fragmented paving stones. 

While Humongous was lining up his next swipe, Sarah saw what the
movement on the parapet was. Hoggle was running nimbly along the
battlements, toward the arch over the inner gates. 

"Hoggle!" Sarah yelled in encouragement, before sprinting between
Humongous's feet and out of the way. 

It was obscure what assistance Hoggle could bring them, but he was
scrambling so urgently up the arch that he clearly had some purpose
in mind. 

Humongous shifted his feet, like armored tanks, to get in his next
blow. In doing so, he positioned himself with his back to the inner
gates. 

Sarah saw Hoggle, now on top of the arch, crouching, prepared to jump
down on the horned helmet of the giant. She covered her face with her
hands, terrified, and peeped through her fingers. What hopeless
heroism it was in Hoggle, like a fly attacking a locomotive. 

With a triumphant shriek, Hoggle landed on Humongous's shoulders. 

"Hoggle!" Sarah whispered, as she took off to avoid another
thunderous stroke. 

Hoggle balanced on one leg, and kicked the giant's helmet. The top
half of it flew open, on a hinge. Inside Humongous's head, a tiny
goblin in a white lab coat, with eyes staring madly through thick
lenses, was feverishly working a bank of levers. Hoggle reached down,
grabbed the goblin under the armpits, and hurled him away. He landed
haplessly on the flagstones of the courtyard and groped for his
smashed spectacles. 

Already Hoggle had jumped down inside the giant's head, and was
operating the levers there as though he had always been the engineer.
Perhaps he did know what he was doing, or perhaps he tugged the
levers at random. The result was that, Humongous, elbows by his sides
and arms raised robotically level, went into a convulsion. His feet
did a shuffling sort of dance, his torso swayed from side to side,
the ax jerked rapidly up and down, and his neck swiveled faster and
faster. Hoggle pulled more levers and then had to make a wild jump
for it, as Humongous went careering off blindly, with his ax
oscillating and steam spurting from his joints. 

Hoggle landed in a heap at Sarah's feet. She helped him up, but had
no time to speak to him yet. Humongous was now rampaging around the
courtyard like a mad bull, bouncing off the walls. His ax was lashing
up and down on a long vertical axis, pulverizing the paving stones
when it landed, and crunching into his own back on the reverse
stroke. 

The giant's random movements eventually brought him back to the inner
gates, where he had started. On its next backward swing, the ax
penetrated deep into the cleft between two stones in the arch. It
stuck there. In consequence, Humongous's next attempt at a mighty
downstroke was converted into a terrifying leverage upward of his
whole body. He was too heavy for his feet to leave the ground. What
might have happened was that the ax could have snapped, or the wall
collapsed. What did happen was that Humongous bent at the knees and
sagged at the waist, looking like a failed giant hammer-thrower, and
little blue sparks shot up and down his armor as his circuits
overloaded. 

"Are you all right?" Sarah asked Hoggle, bending over to fuss over
any bruises he might have. 

Hoggle retreated a few paces and stood with his face inclined. "I'm
not asking to be forgiven," he said obstinately. "I ain't ashamed of
nothin' I did. I don't care what you thinks of me." He was toeing a
little stone around with his boot, his eyes fixed on it. "I told you
I was a coward. Now you sees I was only tellin' the truth. And I
ain't interested in bein' friends ..." 

"I forgive you, Hoggle," Sarah said, simply. 

Hoggle cocked his gnomish head and looked at her from under one bushy
eyebrow. "You do?" he asked in a small voice. 

Sir Didymus strode across and slapped Hoggle's shoulder. "And I
commend thee," he said, with his other hand resting on his staff.
"Seldom have I seen such courage. Sir Galahad himself will be
impressed when word reaches his ears. We owe to thee our lives. Thou
art the fragrant bloom of knightly valor, Sir Hoggle." 

"I am?" 

Ludo paid his tribute. "Hoggle -- Ludo -- friends." 

"We are?" Hoggle agreed uncertainly. 

Sarah had unfastened the string of baubles she had taken from Hoggle
in the hedge maze -- so long ago, it seemed -- and handed them back
to him. "Here are your things, Hoggle. And thank you for your help." 

Hoggle took the jewels and gazed down at them. Then he looked up with
a puckered grin. "Well," he said, and started to stride toward the
inner gates, "what are we waiting for?" 

Sir Didymus called, "Ambrosius!" His steed poked his nose cautiously
around the buttress behind which he had been hiding. 

"Ambrosius!" Sir Didymus raised his voice impatiently. Ambrosius did
not so much trot as sidle up to his master. 

When the knight was mounted up, the party made its way carefully
around the massive shape of Humongous. The blue sparks were still
fizzing. 

Sir Didymus enthusiastically overtook Hoggle and beat upon the inner
gates with his staff. Hoggle pushed. Neither of them could get the
gates open, but it was an easy job for Ludo. Without Humongous, they
were no more than a pair of heavy doors leading to Goblin City. 

* * * * * * * * * * * * *

Jareth was lounging on his throne, propped up on one elbow. Beside
him was Toby. Goblins stood around, watching them play together, and
wishing that they had Toby to play with. It looked like fun. Jareth
would tickle Toby, and whenever he was within range the baby would
punch Jareth in the face. The game had been going on for some time. 

Jareth chuckled. "Spirited little fellow." In more senses than one,
he thought, but why bother to say it when all you've got in the
audience are goblins? He nodded. "I think I'll call him Jareth. He's
got my eyes." 

Toby smacked him in one of them. 

"And my disposition," Jareth added. 

A goblin came running into the chamber, tripped on a chicken carcass,
fell flat on his face, and from there delivered his message. "Your
Highness! The girl!" 

Jareth glanced up laconically. "What?" 

The goblin was picking himself up. "The girl who ate the peach and
forgot everything?" 

"Yes, yes," Jareth said testily. As though he had had more than one
girl on his mind lately. "What of her?" 

The goblin's eyes were boggling, and he had one arm flung out behind
him, pointing. "She's here." 

"Hm?" Jareth stopped tickling Toby and scrutinized the moronic
messenger. 

"She's here, your Highness! With the monster, and Sir Didymus, and
the gnome who's in your employ." 

"Here?" 

"They've gotten through the gates." 

"What?" Jareth barked. 

"The girl who ate the peach and --" 

"Yes!" Jareth's face was working. "She got past Humongous?" 

"Yes, your Highness. He's blown his fuses." 

"Blown his -- where are they?" 

"They're on their way to the castle." 

Jareth stood up, holding Toby, who wriggled. "Stop her!" the Goblin
King commanded. "Call out the guard!" 

The goblins milled around the chamber, screeching, "Call out the
guard!" at each other. 

"Don't mill," Jareth told them. "Do something. She must be stopped." 

As one goblin, they all dashed for the door. 

"Wait!" Jareth shouted. Carrying Toby, he strode over to them and
handed the baby to one of them. "Here," he said, "take Jarethkin. She
must not get the baby." 

The goblin with Toby ran off one way, while the rest rushed off to
raise the alarm. 

Jareth was left alone. "She must not get the baby," he repeated to
himself. "She must be stopped."

************* ************* ************* *************

Chapter Seventeen
Saints and Whiskers

Goblin City was a shantytown, numbering about ten blocks of
ramshackle houses, hiding in each other's shadows, with winding lanes
between them. The buildings rose to sharply pointed eaves or conical
thatch roofs. The windows penetrating the walls were so
higgledy-piggledy that from the outside you might wonder if the
houses had floors at all. Most of the buildings were decorated in the
Goblin Grotesque style, timber trimmed to a rising point like a waxed
mustache, goblinomorphic feet or horns carved into a pediment. The
cat-prowled lanes were littered with scraps of food tossed from the
windows, and other garbage so rotten that it would be an unsavory
task to analyze what it had once been. 

The place was huddled in the shadow of the castle, which rose behind
it in bonnet-towered and turreted splendor. A wide flight of steps,
the main entrance to the castle, faced the inner gates of the
courtyard, and must have formed an imposing approach before the
shantytown had risen up to interrupt the vista. 

Sir Didymus on Ambrosius, Hoggle, Sarah, and Ludo tiptoed through the
marketplace just inside the gates. It was dawn and the city was
apparently fast asleep. Seeing the castle looming up ahead of them,
they made their way quietly through the lanes toward it. Here and
there they crept past a snoozing goblin, propped against a wall. 

Sir Didymus cleared his throat and announced, loudly, "This stealth
is alien to my nature." 

"Ssshhh!" Sarah told him. 

"Quiet, yer windbag!" Hoggle added, in a growl. 

"Sorry, fair maid," Sir Didymus apologized, in a voice hardly lowered
at all. "I know not the word fear." 

"I know," Sarah answered, "but I do." 

"And I does, too," Hoggle added. "Shush!" 

Beyond the shantytown, they came into an open square. The steps up to
the castle were on the far side. Everything was still eerily quiet.
They began to walk softly toward the steps. 

Sarah's heart was pounding. "We're going to make it," she whispered. 

"Piece of cake," Hoggle told her. 

He should have known better. When he had heard her use that phrase,
the penalty had been the slashing machine. This time, it was war. A
bugle sounded, and from both sides of the square the goblin army
suddenly came charging at them, with pounding feet and clanking armor
and a weird, ululating war cry. Scores of helmeted heads could be
seen scuttling along the lower ramparts of the castle. There was only
one thing to do: run for it. And there was only one way to run --
back into town. 

The armies were issuing from twin corridors, which curved around the
sides of the main steps so that their exits faced each other. A
platoon of bombardiers trundled a cannon in the vanguard of each
army, and as the corridors were on an incline, and the cannons were
heavy, and the trundling was enthusiastic, the cannon platoons were
going to collide unless they hauled back hard. Which they did.
Unavailingly, however, for the press of infantry and cavalry behind
them drove them inexorably on. As the four invaders raced for the
cover of the town, they heard a stupendous smash, like a thousand
empty cans crashing together. They turned around, and watched wave
upon wave of the goblin soldiers piling upon top of each other. On
the ramparts, an inaudible bugler was red in the face with blowing
the charge. 

Jareth was standing perpendicular at a window of the castle, watching
the action. He winced, almost imperceptibly. 

Hoggle led Sarah, Ludo, and the mounted Sir Didymus in a sprint along
the mazy lanes of the town. Goblin heads popped out of the windows
above them to watch. Sir Didymus was protesting, "We must stand and
fight them face to face. It is the only honorable ..." 

Hoggle suddenly stopped, his arms spread wide in warning. The rest
halted behind him. At the far end of the street, a detachment of
goblins appeared facing them, spiky with spears. 

"Uh-oh," Sarah muttered. "This could be it." 

"Fear not, sweet damsel," Sir Didymus told her. "These puny goblins
are no match for Sir Didymus." He raised his staff, and was about to
charge the army single-handed when Ambrosius wheeled around and
bolted again. This time, his rider managed to stay in the saddle and,
after touring the streets, brought Ambrosius back to where they had
started. 

Sarah called urgently from a doorway. "In here!" 

She had found a deserted house in which to make a stand. It was built
like a tower. 

Reluctantly, Sir Didymus dismounted and led Ambrosius inside. Sarah
slid the bolt. She was grinning with excitement. However extreme the
peril they were in, nothing would ever be as daunting as the old junk
woman. "You hold the doorway," she told Sir Didymus. "Hoggle and I
will guard that window. And you, Ludo -- up on the roof." 

Ludo nodded obediently. "Ludo -- up." He climbed the winding rungs of
the stairs. 

"Look out!" Sarah cried suddenly. On the wall of the room, she had
seen goblin shadows, snouted and horned, cast through the window by
the rising sun. Sir Didymus at once took up his on-guard position
beside the door. Sarah and Hoggle stood by a dresser full of china. 

Sarah called up the staircase. "Ludo, are you ready?" 

"Ludo -- ready." 

A goblin smashed the window with his pike, and stuck his head inside
to see who was in there. Sarah, standing to one side of the window,
brought a dinner plate down upon his head. He collapsed onto the
windowsill and rolled outside. 

Another took his place. Another plate served the same purpose. 

At once, a third head was poked in. This one had time to peer at the
defenders. "Hoggle!" the goblin exclaimed. "You used to be with us." 

"Yes," Hoggle agreed, and broke a teapot on the goblin's helmeted
head. 

Another ugly head took its turn at the window, and another, and as
fast as their pointed ears and jagged teeth appeared they were
stunned by Sarah or Hoggle. 

Sir Didymus was watching with mixed feeling. He had to hand it to the
girl, she was doughty, and she might make a decent commander of horse
one day. On the other hand, she had posted her most valorous knight
inside a bolted wooden door, where nothing at all was going to
happen. Inexperience, that was all it was. He was wondering whether
to disobey orders and join them at the window when an axhead shaped
like a trefoil splintered the door. Through the crack it had made, he
saw mad red eyes watching him and heard voices talking rapidly. 

This was more like it. He squared up. Then, through the crack, he saw
half a dozen goblins charging with a battering ram. In a trice, he
slid the bolt back and opened the door. As the ram went past him at
full tilt he dealt with each of its bearers adroitly with a thrust of
his trusty staff. "Have at thee!" he hollered excitedly. "En garde,
sirrah!" 

He slammed the door shut and bolted it again, and was trying to use
the battering ram to shore up the splintered door when it was burst
open by a fresh squad of goblins. He had no time to grab his staff.
They leaped upon him, pinioned him face down to the ground, and,
holding his hair, began to bash his nose on the floor. After a while,
they paused to examine their work. 

"Ha!" Sir Didymus shouted tauntingly. "Had enough, have ye? Craven
curs, how little it takes to subdue varlets such as ye are!" 

They started to give him another bashing for that, but Sarah had seen
what was going on. A well-aimed chamber pot sent the goblins flying,
and in a moment Sir Didymus was standing over them. "Saints and
whiskers!" he exclaimed. "Is it worth splintering my staff to
dispatch the likes of ye?" 

Sarah and Hoggle were still holding the window, but their reserve of
crockery was running low, and the horde of goblins was not abating.
When there were no more dinner plates, jugs, or soup bowls, they had
to use teacups and saucers, but sometimes it took two of those to
deal with each goblin. 

Another one of them had time to recognize Hoggle. "What have we done
to you?" the goblin asked. 

"Not me," Hoggle replied. "Her -- you stole her baby brother." 

"So we stole a baby! That's what goblins do. You know that, Hog --" 

His sentence was ended by a soup tureen that Hoggle had been saving
for a special occasion. 

On the roof of the tower, Ludo was showered with spears. He simply
ducked below the parapet. Then a detachment of commando goblins
stormed the outside walls of the tower, clambering up ladders with
the idea of overwhelming Ludo. He was not readily overwhelmable,
kicking them down to the ground one by one as they reached the top of
the ladders and peered over the parapet. The artillery was called up.
From a cannon, a goblin with a spiked helmet was fired at Ludo. The
outcome was that the goblin's helmet was impaled in the mud wall of a
nearby house, leaving him stuck out behind it, flapping his limbs. 

Sir Didymus was listening keenly. Outside the door, he could hear two
goblins conversing. "She's got brains," one said. 

"Yes," the other replied. "I could do with brains like hers." 

"So could I," the first said. "To eat!" 

Sir Didymus was incensed. To hear them impugning so beautiful a
damsel without mercy was more than his knightly honor could tolerate.
Throwing open the door and leaping on Ambrosius's back, he cried, "Ye
Goths and Vandals! Have at ye, then, for the foul blasphemers that ye
are of a maiden's virtue." 

Sarah looked across and saw Sir Didymus level his staff and charge
out. 

"No!" she cried. It was too late. 

Sir Didymus came back a moment later, on his back, head first.
Ambrosius followed at a gallop. 

The peerless knight-in-arms was up and at them in an instant. This
time, Ambrosius bolted with him all around the town again, until they
came face to face with a bristling line of spears. More spears
appeared behind them in the narrow lane. 

"Don't worry, Ambrosius," Sir Didymus told him. "I think we've got
them surrounded." 

With a dazzlingly rapid series of thrusts, parries, and flicks, he
disarmed all the adversaries in front of him, and charged
triumphantly forward into a low porch beam, which unseated him from
the saddle. By the time he was on his feet, he was hemmed in by spear
points. 

"Ha!" he snarled. "Can't take any more, eh? Very well. Throw down
your weapons, and I'll see to it that you're well treated." 

As the spears came down at him, he ran up one of them and vaulted
back into the saddle, which unfortunately was no longer there,
Ambrosius having once again taken the sensible course of action. 

Meanwhile, Sarah had an idea. "Ludo," she shouted, "call the rocks!" 

The noise of the battle was too loud for Ludo, at the top of the
house, to hear her. She would have to go up to him. "Hoggle,
retreat!" she called. "Up the stairs." 

"You first," he called back. 

She did as he said. Hoggle followed her. 

Sir Didymus, hard pressed, ran into the house just in time to cover
their retreat. He came up the stairs backward, ceding one step at a
time, fending off his attackers with cut and passado. 

Sarah raced up to the top of the tower. "Ludo," she panted. "Call the
rocks. Call the rocks, Ludo." 

Ludo did not need the second bidding. He threw his great head back,
closed his eyes, and bellowed longer and louder than an alpine horn. 

The tower quivered and the earth shuddered. A distant rumbling was
heard. Bits fell off the castle walls. 

While they were waiting for the rocks to arrive, their immediate
position was perilous. Sir Didymus could not hold back the invaders
for much longer. Ludo had kicked away the scaling ladders, and so
they were going to be trapped at the top of the tower unless there
was some way down the outside. Not even Ludo's friends the rocks
could help them up there. 

Sarah looked over the parapet. All the goblins were congregated at
the front of the house, struggling to get in after those who were
forcing Sir Didymus back. The lane behind the house was empty, which
gave Sarah an idea. 

Just below the tower roof she had passed a room with two beds in it.
The goblins had not yet advanced that far. She ran down. "Hold them
back for as long as you can, Sir Didymus," she called. 

"'Twill be the greatest pleasure of my life, fair maid," he called
back up to her. 

Swiftly, Sarah knotted sheets and blankets together in a rope. Then
she ran back up to the tower roof, tied one end of the rope to a
column of the parapet and threw the rest over the side. She looked
down and was relieved to see it reached nearly to the ground. "You
first, Hoggle," she said. 

He hesitated. "I'm a coward." 

"No, you're not." 

He paused, almost smiling. "You're right. I'm not. Funny, I always
thought I was." He grasped the rope, stood on the parapet, and
shinned down to the ground. Then he held the rope to anchor it for
Sarah. She followed him down. 

"Ludo!" she called. "You next! Tell Sir Didymus to come after you." 

Seeing the bulk of Ludo loom above the parapet, she crossed her
fingers and prayed that the rope would bear his weight. She could
barely watch. 

It was all right. Ludo came down, a little too fast, scorching his
paws, but he landed safely on the ground. 

Now it was for Sir Didymus to make good his escape. The three of
them, their heads craned back, saw the tiny puissant chevalier come
onto the parapet with his back turned and his staff arm working hard.
With his free hand he took hold of the rope and let himself a few
inches down the outside of the tower. Then they saw him raise his
staff and unhitch the rope from the parapet. He plummeted. 

Sarah pressed her hands to her cheeks. Her mouth opened in horror. 

But the resourceful knight knew what he was doing. With his staff
hand he grabbed the other side of the sheet, and spread his arms
wide. The air filled the sheet, and he parachuted gently down beside
his friends. 

Sarah used the breath she had been holding to gasp, "Sir Didymus!
What did you do that for?" 

"Prithee, sweet damsel," Sir Didymus answered, "wilt thou raise thy
lovely eyes aloft?" 

Sarah looked up, and saw a ring of baffled goblin faces staring
angrily down from the top of the tower. 

"Thou wouldst not have wished them to join our company, wouldst
thou?" Sir Didymus asked, his eyes twinkling. 

During their escape, the rumbling of the rocks had grown into an
oceanic roar. They came rolling across the plain by the hundreds,
answering Ludo's call, and when they hit the outer walls of the city
they built themselves up until the next to arrive could just roll up
the slope and vault inside. Soon they filled the streets, knocking
goblins down like tenpins and ruthlessly pursuing those who fled.
There was no hiding place. The boulders crashed through the doors of
houses where the army had taken cover, and when the goblins jumped
spread-eagled out of windows, the rocks were close behind them. Whole
platoons of goblins were walled up by rocks stacked against doors. 

The artillery commander, knowing no other way to fight, ordered the
cannon to be loaded and discharged at the invaders. Just as the fuse
was ignited, a rock stuffed itself into the mouth of the cannon,
which exploded, leaving the commander a blackened, ragged scarecrow. 

Sarah led her friends back through the chaotic town to the square in
front of the castle. A couple of stray halberdiers boldly confronted
them before the steps. From behind them, Sarah heard a loud rumbling.
She whipped around and screamed. A boulder was rolling at them. It
leapfrogged them and dropped splat on the halberdiers. 

"Rocks -- friends," Ludo remarked, with a touch of pride. 

At the top of the steps was a tall, narrow, grotesquely carved door,
the ceremonial entrance. Sarah pushed at it. It was locked and solid. 

Ludo walked past her and broke the door down as though it were
matchwood. 

Inside the castle, a grand corridor ran ahead of them, and at the far
end of it, through an open door, they could see the throne, with the
vulture squatting above it. 

"Toby," Sarah whispered, and ran to fetch him. If Jareth were there,
he could not stop her now. Nothing could. 

The chamber was deserted. In the middle of it was a cradle, empty.
The clock showed three minutes to thirteen. On his perch, the vulture
shifted from foot to foot. He opened his beak and made a noise like
ghastly laughter.

************* ************* ************* *************

Chapter Eighteen
Seeming

"Toby," Sarah whispered again, gazing down at the empty cradle. 

Sir Didymus was looking from her face to the cradle. He lifted the
blanket and the pillow, searching beneath them, and shook his head.
"An exceptionally small knight is Sir Tobias. I cannot even see him." 

"He's gone," Sarah said. "Jareth has taken him." 

The vulture made a dry cackling noise. 

Sarah knew that Jareth would not have abandoned the castle. He had to
be here somewhere, and so had Toby. The sole exit from the chamber,
apart from the way they had come, was a flight of stairs to one side
of the throne. She could not see where it led because the passage
turned a corner, but a lovely glowing light was emanating from it.
"That's the only way he could have gone," Sarah said. 

She ran toward it, taking care to avoid stepping on the half-gnawed
chicken bones, rotting tomatoes, squashed pears, and other garbage
that littered the floor. Sir Didymus, Hoggle, and Ludo ran after her. 

"No," she said, when she reached the first stair. She turned around
and told her friends, "I ... I have to face him alone." 

Sir Didymus, already rehearsing his lunge and parry as he ran, was
disconcerted. "Why?" he asked. 

"Because ..." It was a good question. "Because that's the way it's
done," Sarah replied. 

"Who says?" Hoggle asked. 

"They all do," Sarah told him. "The stories, all of them." 

The three of them regarded her for some time. Seeing the
disappointment on their faces, Sarah felt wretched. But she knew that
she was right. 

At length, Sir Didymus said, slowly, "Well, if that is the way 'tis
done, then that is how thou must needs do it." He raised his staff
and squinted along it. "But shouldst thou have need of us ..." 

"Yes," Hoggle added, "if you need us ..." 

"I'll call," Sarah promised. "Thank you. All of you." She smiled,
feeling awkward with gratitude. 

The she turned and ran up the stairs, toward the glowing light. 

It was a long staircase and turned through several angles. She was
puffing by the time she reached the top and emerged onto a stone
platform. What she saw took all her breath away. 

Above, below, or around her -- which, she could not tell -- was a
vast stone hall, with so many staircases, balconies, windows, and
doorways at different heights and odd angles to each other that she
had no idea what was up or down, near or far, inside or out, backward
or forward. Planes reversed themselves as you watched them, receding
corners suddenly jutted out, rising steps inverted themselves, floors
became ceilings, and walls turned into precipices. In this room, it
seemed that the law of gravity had been repealed, and perspective had
seven dimensions. If there had been water, it would have seemed to
flow uphill. She felt sick and giddy, and had to cling to a pillar to
remain upright. "It's impossible," she whispered to herself. As long
as she went on looking at the hall, it went on altering. Does it
still go on altering, she wondered dizzily, when no one is looking at
it? 

With her back to the wall, she edged along the platform. If I take it
step by step, she was thinking, I will get there. If there isa there.
She edged along, hoping that it was along and not up or past or
through, until she came to a point that she was quite certain was
where she had started. Yes, there was the top of the staircase behind
her. She began to edge the other way, until she heard a voice from
somewhere below. She knew whose voice it was. 

"I've been expecting you," it said. 

With a deep breath, she inched to the edge of the platform. Beyond
her, apparently sitting on a vertical wall, was Jareth. 

"Where's Toby?" Sarah asked. 

"He's safe. In my keeping." 

"You're not keeping him." 

"Oh. And why not?" 

"I have come this far. I am here." 

Jareth chuckled. "Sheer luck." 

"I am here. Give me Toby back." 

"You have understood nothing," Jareth told her. "You have answered
none of the Labyrinth's riddles. You don't even know what the
questions were." 

"That wasn't our bargain." 

Jareth threw back his head and laughed. "There, just as I told you.
You have understood nothing." 

"You are wrong. I have come to understand one thing very well. You
are just putting on a show of confidence. It doesn't take me in
anymore. You are frightened, Jareth." 

"So are you." 

"Yes." 

For a few seconds, they were watching each other's eyes. 

Then Jareth began to move, all over the seven perspectives, and Sarah
watched him as he moved. He seemed to walk along ceilings and climb
descending stairs. He danced on high walls. And as he moved he called
to her, "You are cruel, Sarah. We are well matched, you and I. I need
your cruelty, just as you need mine." 

Watching him, Sarah felt her knees start to wobble. She had fallen
for his trick. She had no idea now whether she was looking up or
down, whether the platform where she stood was solid or void.
Everything switched continually, like a photographic negative at an
angle to the light. She held her arms out for balance, but it was no
good. She stumbled, her head spinning, and felt herself topple. She
landed on a ceiling, and tried to adjust her senses. Shakily, she
stood up. 

Then she saw Toby. He was crawling up a flight of stairs, still in
his striped pajamas. 

"Toby!" she called. 

The baby did not respond. 

"Toby!" she shouted. 

The only answer she got was Jareth's laughter. 

Somehow, she had to reach Toby. She began to work her way down a
flight of stairs. A movement below her caught her attention. She
peered beneath the stairs and saw Jareth walking parallel to her,
apparently upside down, like a reflection in ice. Or maybe she was
upside down. She ran to get away from him, to get to Toby. Jareth
mirrored her wherever she went. She ran along a balcony, and suddenly
he appeared at the far end of it, upright. She turned, ran back, and
fell. She landed with a bruising thud. Jareth was watching her,
laughing. 

"I will reach him," Sarah said to Jareth. 

Instead of answering, Jareth produced a crystal ball and tossed it up
a flight of stairs. Sarah's eyes followed it, and she saw it land
near Toby, who was happily climbing on hands and knees up another
staircase. 

"Toby!" she cried in alarm. 

The baby was fascinated by the bouncing ball. He reached for it, and
when it passed him he scuttled after it. Sarah saw him approaching
the edge of a precipitous fall. 

"No!" she called out. "Oh, no! Toby!" 

Toby went over the edge and crawled down the vertical wall, still
chasing the ball, which was bouncing around crazily in defiance of
all laws of motion. 

Sarah blinked. It was impossible. Jareth laughed. 

She started to follow a line of stairs that went in the direction of
Toby. As she drew near him, the baby crawled after the ball in
another plane, leaving her stranded. She followed him again, and the
same thing happened, and again. He was moving on an axis with which
she could not intersect. And everywhere he crawled, he seemed to be
at risk of falling from a balcony, or tumbling all the way down a
flight of stone stairs. 

Suddenly, Jareth appeared behind her. He laid his hands on her
shoulders and spun her around. She was too weak to resist him. His
face, as he looked into hers, was amused. It said: It's been a fine
game, Sarah, and now it's time to finish playing, because you cannot
ever win. 

In the corner of her eye, she saw a small movement. Toby was crawling
toward a window ledge. She shrugged Jareth's hands from her shoulders
and stared at her brother. There could be no optical doubt about it
this time. Outside the window, birds were flying in the sunlight, and
Toby was clambering up onto the ledge. Between her and the baby was a
vast space of the hall. He was teetering on the ledge now, trying to
stand up. She could not run to him, even supposing she were able to
find a path to him through the deceiving planes. It was possible, she
could not be sure, that he was below her, and that she could reach
him with a jump; a jump so deep that she would crack every bone in
her body. 

Jareth was smiling triumphantly at her. This was how her quest ended.
If he could not keep the baby, nor would she. She watched Toby totter
on his precarious perch, and a small cry came from her lips. 

She closed her eyes and jumped. 

* * * * * * * * * * * * *

When she opened her eyes, she was not sure where she was. It could
have been another part of the hall. She thought she recognized it,
but could not place it. 

Yet something had changed. Near her was an ogee window, without
glass, and through it she could see the upper half of one wing of the
castle. It was in ruins, the cladding stones mostly gone, grass
growing in the gaps they'd left. The turret roofs had collapsed, and
brambles were reaching for the throat of the tower. Within the
castle, where she was, she heard in the air the humming that she had
come to associate with Jareth, but it had a hollow ring to it,
something forlorn, like music in an abandoned house. In the crack
between two flagstones where she lay she saw that weeds had started
to push their way through. She stood up and looked around. There was
no sign of Toby. 

Jareth stepped out from a shadowy archway, wearing a faded,
threadbare cloak. His face looked older, drawn. In his blond mane was
a trace of gray. 

How long had she been here? She detected no change in herself. 

Jareth was waiting for her with his arms folded. She advanced upon
him. "Give me the child," she said. 

He paused before answering. "Sarah -- beware. I have been generous
until now, but I can be cruel." 

"Generous!" She advanced another step. "What have you done that was
generous?" 

"Everything. I have done everything you wanted." He took a pace back,
into the shadow of the archway. "You asked that the child be taken. I
took him. You cowered before me. I was frightening." 

Taking another step away from her, he gestured in the air. "I have
reordered time," he told her. The thirteen-hour clock had appeared,
floating above his head. Its hands were whirling around. "I have
turned the world upside down." 

Sarah continued to advance upon him, her arms outreached. He
retreated deeper into the shadows. 

"And I have done it all for you," he said with a shake of his head.
"I am exhausted from living up to your expectations. Isn't that
generous? Stay back!" He raised his hands as though to fend her off
and took another pace away from her. In a louder voice, he repeated,
"Stay back!" 

Sarah's lips were parted. "Through dangers untold and hardships
unnumbered, I have fought my way here to the castle beyond the Goblin
City --" 

"Listen!" said a goblin, one of a nest in a dark corner of the
castle. 

Jareth was retreating step by step up a staircase behind the archway. 

Sarah continued to advance, into the archway. 

"-- to take back the child you have stolen," she repeated. "For my
will is as strong as yours --" 

"Stop!" Jareth raised the palm of his hand to her. "Wait! Sarah, look
-- look what I can offer you." He raised his left arm and made a
large gesture with his hand. A glowing crystal ball appeared in it.
He spun it around in his fingers, smiled wanly, and said, "It will
show you your dreams. You remember." 

Sarah took another step. 

"-- and my kingdom as great --" 

"She's going to say it," a goblin hissed. 

"She's going to say the words," gabbled another, agitatedly. 

The stairs behind Jareth were descending now, and he backed slowly
down them as Sarah stood above him. "I ask so little," he said,
spinning the crystal. "Just believe in me, and you can have
everything you want ... everything you have ever dreamed of ... your
dreams, Sarah ..." 

She was frowning, and had halted her advance. "... and my kingdom as
great ...," she said. "Damn!" 

A goblin shook his head decisively. "That's not it. Never." 

"Sshh!" said another. 

Sarah's fists were clenched white. She was thinking frantically. What
were her right words? 

Jareth took a step toward her. He need her belief in him. "Just fear
me and love me," he told her in a gentle voice, "and do as I say, and
I ... I will be your slave." He stretched his hand out toward her,
and took another step back up the stairs. 

"Nah." A goblin shook his hideous head. "Doesn't look like it now,
does it?" 

Jareth's fingers were close to Sarah's face. 

She stood where she was, and swallowed. "Kingdom as great ...," she
muttered, " ... kingdom as great ..." She saw the crystal spinning in
his fingers, and felt on her lips the warmth of his outstretched
hand. She gasped, and, from some inspired recess of her mind, the
words came out, blurted out. 

"You have no power over me." 

"No!" Jareth screamed. 

"No!" the goblins exclaimed, astounded. 

A clock began to strike. 

Jareth tossed the crystal ball up into the air, where it hovered, a
bubble. Sarah looked at it, and saw Jareth's face, distorted, on the
shifting, iridescent surface. Gently, it drifted down toward her. She
reached out fascinated fingers for it and, as she touched the bubble
with her fingertips, it burst. A mist of water atoms floated down the
air toward Jareth. 

But she saw that Jareth had disappeared. She heard his voice, for a
last time, moaning, "Sarah ... Sarah ..." 

His empty cloak was settling onto the ground. A beam of light picked
out a little cloud of dust motes rising from it. 

The clock continued to strike. 

With a last, slow flutter, the cloak lay still. From beneath it, as
the clock struck for the twelfth time, a white owl flew out and
circled over Sarah. 

Tears were trickling down her cheeks. 

************* ************* ************* *************

Chapter Nineteen
Good Night

Sarah closed her eyes to stem the tears and brushed her cheeks with
the palms of her hands. "I must stop this habit of crying," she said
aloud, as a distraction from her sadness. "I must also stop gasping,
gulping, trembling, shouting, and generally going over the top when
..." Then she remembered that she had not found Toby again, and she
opened her eyes in alarm. 

The white owl was still flapping above her, but in other respects the
scene had changed. She was standing on the staircase of her home, and
it was dark outside. 

She raised her eyes to look at the owl. It circled her for a last
time, found an open window, and flew out into the night. Then she was
running up the stairs two at a time, shouting, "Toby! Toby!" 

He was in his crib, fast asleep. She could not help but pick him up
and cuddle him. He opened his eyes dozily, thought about crying, but
decided that he was in good enough shape without it, so he smiled
instead. Sarah picked up Launcelot from the floor and put the teddy
bear in his arms, saying, "Here you are, Toby. He's yours." Then she
tucked him into his crib again. He went straight to sleep. 

She stayed there with him for a long time, watching him breathe
peacefully, with Launcelot in his arms. 

Back in her own room, the full moon was shining outside her window.
She left the curtains open, to see it. If she went to bed quickly, it
would still be shining in when she turned the light out. The alarm
clock by her bed showed that the time was after midnight. Her parents
would be back from the show any minute now. 

She sat at her dressing table and picked up a hairbrush, but her
attention wandered to the photographs she had around the mirror, her
mother and Jeremy, smiling at each other like young lovers, the
signed posters, the gossip stories about romantic attachment.
Deliberately, she began to remove one picture after another from the
mirror. She glanced at each one before putting it away in a drawer. 

On the dressing table one picture remained, of her father and mother
and herself, aged ten. Sarah straightened the picture. Then she went
to get the music box and put it in the drawer along with the pictures
and clippings, shoved far back. 

Downstairs, she heard the front door open and close. Her stepmother
called, "Sarah?" 

She didn't answer at once. She was holding her copy of The Labyrinth. 

"Sarah?" 

"Wait," Sarah whispered. "I am closing a chapter of my life. Just
wait." She paused, and added, still in a whisper, "Please." She put
the book in the drawer with all the rest, and stood with her hand on
it there. 

"Sarah!" 

Sarah left it a moment, then called back, "Yes. Yes, I'm here." She
looked at the drawer, and sighed. "Welcome back," she called. 

"What?" Her stepmother, taking her coat off downstairs, paused,
puzzled. "What did you say?" she called up. 

Sarah opened her mouth, and closed it again. Once was enough, she
thought. Once was all right. Any more would be overweening. I nearly
overwent there, she smiled to herself, and pushed the drawer shut. 

She straightened up, and on the dark window saw her reflection
against the moonlight. Behind her reflection was Ludo. 

"Ludo -- good-bye -- Sarah," he said. 

She spun around with a cry of joy. The room was empty. 

She checked the window again. Sir Didymus was there. 

"And remember, sweetest damsel, shouldst thou ever have need ..." 

"I'll call," she told him. She glanced around the room again. Empty,
of course. 

Sir Didymus was hurrying back into the window pane. "I forgot to say,
also, that if ever thou shouldst think on marriage ..." 

"I understand," Sarah told him. "Good-bye, brave Sir Didymus." 

He faded. Sarah kept her eyes on the window. She did not have long to
wait. Hoggle popped up from behind the bed. "Yes, if you ever need us
... for any reason at all ..." He stared at her from under his bushy
eyebrows, and started to fade. 

"Hoggle," Sarah said, "I need you. I need you all." 

"Sometimes," the Wise Man observed, "to need is ... to let go." 

"Oh, wow!" said his hat. "And that's just for starters." 

Outside the dark window, the white owl had been perched with his
claws hooked on a branch, an effigy of watching and waiting. Now he
swooped away over the park, on silent velvet wings, up toward the
full moon. Nobody saw him, white in the moonlight, black against the
stars.
--


